We've covered an awful lot of ground in this
particular lecture, so let's summarise some
of the most important points.
In the last lecture, we considered a very
simplistic control case. We called it independent
joint control and we ignored facts like gravity,
but in a real robot such as the PUMA robot,
shown here in this particular configuration,
we can imagine the torque that must be required
at the shoulder joint and at the elbow joint in order to stop the robot collapsing under the effect of gravity.
So this was the robot joint control we had
for the independent control case and we modified
that. We introduced the disturbance torque,
and this might be due to non-linear friction
or it might be due to gravity. This is the
disturbance force TD.
And then we looked at the effect that the
disturbance torque has on the joint position
and it can be significant, so it's something
that we need to deal with.
We then considered a very simple case: a single
motor attached to a link, and the link has
got mass. If a joint is controlled by a PD
controller, a pretty typical sort of controller
for a robot joint, then we saw that the effect
of gravity is to deflect the joint, introducing
a positioning error. The joint angle is not
the desired joint angle. And the amount of
that error is inversely proportional to the
controller gain P, so if we want to make the
error very small, we need to use a very high
gain. But we saw that there is some consequences
with increasing the gain, in particular, increased
overshoot in our joint control system.
So another strategy that we looked at then
is to introduce an integral term. This is
a term that ramps up while there is a positioning
error, increasing the torque in the joint
until the error is eliminated.
Another strategy we looked at is feedforward
control. And here, we assume that we can estimate
the disturbance torque and in the case of
gravity, that's most certainly the case. So,
we estimate what gravity should be and multiply
it by a gain and introduce it into the output
of our controller, and that cancels out the
actual disturbance.
This is a technique that works well even if
our estimate is not too precise. Partial cancellation
of disturbance is better than no cancellation
at all.
Next we considered the dynamic parameters
of a serial link manipulator.
We've looked at this simple robot earlier when we were studying kinematics.
Now we want to understand the dynamics of this.
So we've indicated the center of mass of each
of the links, and we described the position
of the center of mass of each link with respect
to the link coordinate frame and the inertia
of each link. The mass is a scalar, the position
of the center of mass is a three-element vector,
and the inertia is a three by three matrix,
it's a symmetric matrix, so it actually has
only six unique elements. So each link is
therefore described by ten dynamic parameters.
The dynamics of moving bodies is described
by a number of mathematical techniques. And
we used a combination of Newton's second law,
F equals MA and Euler's equation for rotational
motion. Together, we call this a Newton-Euler
method.
And we then described a very efficient computer
algorithm, the recursive Newton-Euler algorithm,
o qual podemos usar no MATLAB para calcular torques
de junta em função de Q, Q ponto e Q dois pontos.
Não entramos nos detalhes do método recursivo
Newton-Euler. Você pode achar os detalhes
em vários livros e também pode olhar no
código exibido pela Toolbox.
As expressões para o torque de junta do robô em
função de Q, Q ponto e Q dois pontos são
até um pouco complicadas, mas elas podem ser
fatoradas e expressas de forma concisa
em uma equação matricial. Daí o torque aplicado à
junta implica em um termo inercial, em um termo de
Coriolis e centrípeto, e em um termo de gravidade. Nós
vamos passar um tempinho investigando
detalhadamente cada um desses termos.
No que tange ao controle de uma junta específica
de um robô, as coisas são bem mais complicadas do que
elas eram na situação do controle de junta
independente. Antes, tínhamos que lidar apenas
com os dois primeiros termos. Agora temos que lidar com
torques que são causados pela aceleração de todas
as outras juntas do robô, com a velocidade de
todas as outras juntas do robô e com a influência da gravidade.
Com alguma manipulação matemática, podemos
visualizar isso com uma equação um tanto concisa,
que se apresenta assim. E a linha de baixo
mostra que a inércia da junta do robô é
uma função da configuração de todo o
robô, não é mais uma constante.
Temos o termo de fricção viscosa e temos
o termo de perturbação de torque, o qual é causado
pela aceleração e pela velocidade de todas as outras
juntas do robô. Inércia com variação no tempo é um
pequeno problema porque ela dificulta
o ajuste do sistema de controle na obtenção do
melhor tempo de adequação e sobressinal.
O torque de perturbação significa mais trabalho para
o controlador de junta. Ele deve obter uma alta
performance para conseguir ignorar o torque de
perturbação e desempenhar objetivos com ordem e precisão.
Existem algumas técnicas que ajudam na eliminação desses efeitos
da dinâmica de um corpo rígido, como introduzir uma caixa de
transmissão. Ela reduz a inércia dependente de configuração,
a qual torna a inércia quase independente da
configuração do robô e atenua consideravelmente
o torque de perturbação. Uma caixa de transmissão é um
truque simples e a maioria dos robôs possuem ela
para amplificar o torque de motores elétricos de alta velocidade.
Podemos aplicar também uma técnica de cálculo
chamada controle de torque de alimentação direta ou controle
de torque calculado. Efetivamente, o que estamos
fazendo aqui é trocar o custo e a complexidade
mecânica - por exemplo, a adição de uma caixa de
transmissão - com cálculo. O cálculo está
ficando mais e mais acessível a cada ano.
Podemos rearranjar as equações de movimento
de corpos rígidos dessa forma. Podemos obter uma expressão
para Q ponto ponto - a aceleração da junta - em
relação ao toque que apliquei a um robô.
Eu posso integrar a aceleração para obter velocidade,
integrada novamente para obter posição, e agora
o que tenho é a dinâmica direta do
manipulador de robô. Essa é uma função que
me dá o movimento do robô como uma função
de torque. E isso é bastante útil quando
eu quero simular a movimentação do robô em um ambiente
do mundo real com um controle que eu tenha projetado.